README.md, before:

[![Build](https://github.com/MaxMahem/collect_failable/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/MaxMahem/collect_failable/actions/workflows/build.yml)
[![Docs](https://github.com/MaxMahem/collect_failable/actions/workflows/docs.yml/badge.svg)](https://maxmahem.github.io/collect_failable/collect_failable/index.html)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/collect_failable)](https://crates.io/crates/collect_failable)
[![dependency status](https://deps.rs/repo/github/maxmahem/collect_failable/status.svg)](https://deps.rs/repo/github/maxmahem/collect_failable)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/github/MaxMahem/collect_failable/graph/badge.svg?token=6JJF59BIO3)](https://codecov.io/github/MaxMahem/collect_failable)
![GitHub License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/maxmahem/collect_failable)

# `collect_failable`

A set of traits for collecting values into containers that must uphold invariants during construction or extension. These traits let you propagate structured errors instead of panicking or silently discarding data. Examples include preventing duplicate keys in a `HashMap` or respecting capacity limits in types like `ArrayVec`.

## Features

This crate provides several complementary traits for failable collection:

- `TryFromIterator` – build a new container from an iterator, returning an error when invariants can't be satisfied.
- `TryCollectEx` – ergonomic `collect`-style extension for iterator consumers, forwarding a call to `TryFromIterator`.
- `TryExtend` – fallible extend operations with strong and basic error guarantees variants.
- `TryExtendOne` – extend with a single item, providing cleaner error types and strong guarantees.
- `TryUnzip` – `unzip` an iterator of pairs into two fallible containers.
- `FoldMut` – `fold`-style extension building a collection via mutation rather than move.

Additionally, several implementations are provided for common and popular containers. See the [implementations](#implementations) section for more details.

## Installation

It's on [crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/collect_failable).

## Usage

### `TryFromIterator` and `TryCollectEx`

Construct a container from an iterator, with errors for invalid input. This behaves like `FromIterator` but returns `Result<Self, E>` instead of panicking or ignoring failures.

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;
use collect_failable::{TryFromIterator, TryCollectEx};

// can be called on any type that implements TryFromIterator
let err = HashMap::try_from_iter([(1, 2), (2, 3), (1, 4), (3, 5)]).expect_err("should be Err");
assert_eq!(err.item.0, 1); // err.item is the colliding (K, V) tuple

// For `HashMap` the error contains all the data necessary to reconstruct the consumed iterator
let all_items: Vec<_> = err.into_iter().collect();
assert_eq!(all_items.len(), 4); // all 4 original items are present, though order is not guaranteed

// or collected via the TryCollectEx trait a turbofish may be necessary to disambiguate
let map = [(1, 2), (2, 3)].into_iter().try_collect_ex::<HashMap<_, _>>().expect("should be Ok");
assert_eq!(map, HashMap::from([(1, 2), (2, 3)]));

// or type ascription. Note the Result type can be inferred, just not the collection type.
let map: HashMap<_, _> = [(1, 2), (2, 3)].into_iter().try_collect_ex().expect("should be Ok");
assert_eq!(map, HashMap::from([(1, 2), (2, 3)]));
```

### `TryExtend` and `TryExtendSafe`

Extend an existing container with items that may violate its invariants. Two different trait exposes two styles of error behavior:

- `TryExtendSafe` – **strong guarantee** on an error, the container must remain unchanged.
- `TryExtend` – **basic guarantee** the container may have partially ingested items, but must remain valid.

Use `TryExtendSafe` if you must avoid mutation on failure; otherwise, prefer the faster `TryExtend`.

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;
use collect_failable::TryExtendSafe;

let mut map = HashMap::new();
map.try_extend_safe([(1, 2), (2, 3)]).expect("should be Ok");
assert_eq!(map, HashMap::from([(1, 2), (2, 3)]));

// on a failure, the container is not modified
map.try_extend_safe([(1, 3)]).expect_err("should be Err");
assert_eq!(map, HashMap::from([(1, 2), (2, 3)]));
```

### `TryExtendOne`

Extend a collection with a single item. This trait always provides a **strong guarantee**: on failure, the collection remains unchanged. Implemented as a seperate trait with no default implementation due to limitations imposed by the trait definition.

### `TryUnzip`

Fallible equivalent of [`Iterator::unzip`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html#method.unzip). Given an iterator of `(A, B)` items, produce two collections that implement `Default + TryExtend`, stopping on the first failure.

Allows unzipping an iterator of pairs into two collections that implement `Default` and `TryExtend`.

This is analogous to [`Iterator::unzip`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html#method.unzip), except allows for failable construction.

```rust
use std::collections::{BTreeSet, HashSet};
use collect_failable::TryUnzip;

// Unzip into two different container types
let data = vec![(1, 'a'), (2, 'b'), (3, 'c')];
let (nums, chars): (BTreeSet<i32>, HashSet<char>) = data.into_iter().try_unzip().expect("should be ok");

assert_eq!(nums, BTreeSet::from([1, 2, 3]));
assert_eq!(chars, HashSet::from(['a', 'b', 'c']));
```

## Implementations

Implementations for various containers are provided.
* [HashMap](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/collections/struct.HashMap.html), [HashSet](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/collections/struct.HashSet.html)
* [BTreeMap](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/collections/struct.BTreeMap.html), [BTreeSet](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/collections/struct.BTreeSet.html)
* [Array](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.array.html) (feature `unsafe`)
* [ArrayVec](https://docs.rs/arrayvec/latest/arrayvec/struct.ArrayVec.html) (feature `arrayvec`)
* [hashbrown::HashMap](https://docs.rs/hashbrown/latest/hashbrown/struct.HashMap.html), [hashbrown::HashSet](https://docs.rs/hashbrown/latest/hashbrown/struct.HashSet.html) (feature `hashbrown`)
* [indexmap::IndexMap](https://docs.rs/indexmap/latest/indexmap/), [indexmap::IndexSet](https://docs.rs/indexmap/latest/indexmap/) (feature `indexmap`)

### Tuple Implementations

Tuples of size 2 implement both `TryFromIterator` and `TryExtend` when their inner types do. Errors respect the guarantee of each component, mirroring the behavior of the `std` tuple implementations—but with fallibility. Implementing `TryExtendSafe` or `TryExtendOne` is not possible since they cannot provide atomic single-item guarantees within the trait definition.

### Array Implementation

Arrays implement `TryFromIterator` for iterators that yield exactly the right number of elements. This uses `unsafe` internally and is gated behind the `unsafe` feature (enabled by default).

### Result Implementation

`TryFromIterator` is implemented for `Result<C, E>`, where `C` implements `TryFromIterator<T>`, similar to the [`FromIterator`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/result/enum.Result.html#impl-FromIterator%3CResult%3CA,+E%3E%3E-for-Result%3CV,+E%3E) implementation for `Result`. This allows short-circuiting collection of failable values into a container whose construction is also failable.

Commit message:

refactor: remove TryFromIterator for tuples and TupleCollectionError
- Removed TupleCollectionError error type
- Removed TryFromIterator implementation for tuples
- Updated documentation to recommend TryUnzip or TryExtend for tuple operations
- Removed related test files

BREAKING CHANGE: Tuple collections should now use TryUnzip or TryExtend instead of TryFromIterator.

README.md, after:

[![Build](https://github.com/MaxMahem/collect_failable/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/MaxMahem/collect_failable/actions/workflows/build.yml)
[![Docs](https://github.com/MaxMahem/collect_failable/actions/workflows/docs.yml/badge.svg)](https://maxmahem.github.io/collect_failable/collect_failable/index.html)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/collect_failable)](https://crates.io/crates/collect_failable)
[![dependency status](https://deps.rs/repo/github/maxmahem/collect_failable/status.svg)](https://deps.rs/repo/github/maxmahem/collect_failable)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/github/MaxMahem/collect_failable/graph/badge.svg?token=6JJF59BIO3)](https://codecov.io/github/MaxMahem/collect_failable)
![GitHub License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/maxmahem/collect_failable)

# `collect_failable`

A set of traits for collecting values into containers that must uphold invariants during construction or extension. These traits let you propagate structured errors instead of panicking or silently discarding data. Examples include preventing duplicate keys in a `HashMap` or respecting capacity limits in types like `ArrayVec`.

## Features

This crate provides several complementary traits for failable collection:

- `TryFromIterator` – build a new container from an iterator, returning an error when invariants can't be satisfied.
- `TryCollectEx` – ergonomic `collect`-style extension for iterator consumers, forwarding a call to `TryFromIterator`.
- `TryExtend` – fallible extend operations with strong and basic error guarantees variants.
- `TryExtendOne` – extend with a single item, providing cleaner error types and strong guarantees.
- `TryUnzip` – `unzip` an iterator of pairs into two fallible containers.
- `FoldMut` – `fold`-style extension building a collection via mutation rather than move.

Additionally, several implementations are provided for common and popular containers. See the [implementations](#implementations) section for more details.

## Installation

It's on [crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/collect_failable).

## Usage

### `TryFromIterator` and `TryCollectEx`

Construct a container from an iterator, with errors for invalid input. This behaves like `FromIterator` but returns `Result<Self, E>` instead of panicking or ignoring failures.

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;
use collect_failable::{TryFromIterator, TryCollectEx};

// can be called on any type that implements TryFromIterator
let err = HashMap::try_from_iter([(1, 2), (2, 3), (1, 4), (3, 5)]).expect_err("should be Err");
assert_eq!(err.item.0, 1); // err.item is the colliding (K, V) tuple

// For `HashMap` the error contains all the data necessary to reconstruct the consumed iterator
let all_items: Vec<_> = err.into_iter().collect();
assert_eq!(all_items.len(), 4); // all 4 original items are present, though order is not guaranteed

// or collected via the TryCollectEx trait a turbofish may be necessary to disambiguate
let map = [(1, 2), (2, 3)].into_iter().try_collect_ex::<HashMap<_, _>>().expect("should be Ok");
assert_eq!(map, HashMap::from([(1, 2), (2, 3)]));

// or type ascription. Note the Result type can be inferred, just not the collection type.
let map: HashMap<_, _> = [(1, 2), (2, 3)].into_iter().try_collect_ex().expect("should be Ok");
assert_eq!(map, HashMap::from([(1, 2), (2, 3)]));
```

### `TryExtend` and `TryExtendSafe`

Extend an existing container with items that may violate its invariants. Two different trait exposes two styles of error behavior:

- `TryExtendSafe` – **strong guarantee** on an error, the container must remain unchanged.
- `TryExtend` – **basic guarantee** the container may have partially ingested items, but must remain valid.

Use `TryExtendSafe` if you must avoid mutation on failure; otherwise, prefer the faster `TryExtend`.

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;
use collect_failable::TryExtendSafe;

let mut map = HashMap::new();
map.try_extend_safe([(1, 2), (2, 3)]).expect("should be Ok");
assert_eq!(map, HashMap::from([(1, 2), (2, 3)]));

// on a failure, the container is not modified
map.try_extend_safe([(1, 3)]).expect_err("should be Err");
assert_eq!(map, HashMap::from([(1, 2), (2, 3)]));
```

### `TryExtendOne`

Extend a collection with a single item. This trait always provides a **strong guarantee**: on failure, the collection remains unchanged. Implemented as a seperate trait with no default implementation due to limitations imposed by the trait definition.

### `TryUnzip`

Fallible equivalent of [`Iterator::unzip`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html#method.unzip). Given an iterator of `(A, B)` items, produce two collections that implement `Default + TryExtend`, stopping on the first failure.

Allows unzipping an iterator of pairs into two collections that implement `Default` and `TryExtend`.

This is analogous to [`Iterator::unzip`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html#method.unzip), except allows for failable construction.

```rust
use std::collections::{BTreeSet, HashSet};
use collect_failable::TryUnzip;

// Unzip into two different container types
let data = vec![(1, 'a'), (2, 'b'), (3, 'c')];
let (nums, chars): (BTreeSet<i32>, HashSet<char>) = data.into_iter().try_unzip().expect("should be ok");

assert_eq!(nums, BTreeSet::from([1, 2, 3]));
assert_eq!(chars, HashSet::from(['a', 'b', 'c']));
```

## Implementations

Implementations for various containers are provided.
* [HashMap](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/collections/struct.HashMap.html), [HashSet](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/collections/struct.HashSet.html)
* [BTreeMap](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/collections/struct.BTreeMap.html), [BTreeSet](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/collections/struct.BTreeSet.html)
* [Array](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.array.html) (feature `unsafe`)
* [ArrayVec](https://docs.rs/arrayvec/latest/arrayvec/struct.ArrayVec.html) (feature `arrayvec`)
* [hashbrown::HashMap](https://docs.rs/hashbrown/latest/hashbrown/struct.HashMap.html), [hashbrown::HashSet](https://docs.rs/hashbrown/latest/hashbrown/struct.HashSet.html) (feature `hashbrown`)
* [indexmap::IndexMap](https://docs.rs/indexmap/latest/indexmap/), [indexmap::IndexSet](https://docs.rs/indexmap/latest/indexmap/) (feature `indexmap`)

### Tuple Implementations

Tuples of size 2 implement `TryExtend` when their inner types do. For constructing tuple collections from iterators, use `TryUnzip` instead, which provides better ergonomics and error handling. Implementing `TryExtendSafe` or `TryExtendOne` is not possible since tuples cannot provide atomic single-item guarantees within the trait definition.

### Array Implementation

Arrays implement `TryFromIterator` for iterators that yield exactly the right number of elements. This uses `unsafe` internally and is gated behind the `unsafe` feature (enabled by default).

### Result Implementation

`TryFromIterator` is implemented for `Result<C, E>`, where `C` implements `TryFromIterator<T>`, similar to the [`FromIterator`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/result/enum.Result.html#impl-FromIterator%3CResult%3CA,+E%3E%3E-for-Result%3CV,+E%3E) implementation for `Result`. This allows short-circuiting collection of failable values into a container whose construction is also failable.
